[CIS-1459] Make Data Formatters Configurable (#1742)
GetStream/stream-chat-swift: docusaurus/docs/iOS/uikit/data-formatting.md

---
title: Data Formatting
---

import ThemingNote from '../common-content/theming-note.md'

> You can customize how data is formatted across all the UI components provided by `StreamChatUI`. The SDK allows you to change the data formatting through the `Appearance` configuration where you can change, for example, how message dates, video durations, and times are formatted in each component. Each formatter can be accessed through the `Appearance.formatters` property. You can replace a formatter with a custom one since each formatter is represented by a `Protocol`, but you can also do simple changes by changing the default formatters provided by the SDK.

Reviewer: This paragraph could be rephrased. eg

```suggestion
You can customize how data is formatted across all the UI components provided by `StreamChatUI`. The SDK allows you to change the data formatting through the `Appearance.formatters` configuration.

Following data can be formatted:
* channel name
* message timestamps
* video durations & times

For simple customizations, use the default formatters provided by the SDK. Furtherly you can leverage your own formatter by adhering it to the respective data formatter `protocol`. 
```

Author: @bielikb I've simplified this introduction, let me know if you like it 🙂

## Changing the channel name formatting

As an example to showcase how to create a custom formatter let's change the formatting of how the last activity of a user is displayed. By default, the last activity formatting is calculated by the `DefaultUserLastActivityFormatter` which uses a custom logic to display the last activity time relative to the current day in hours, weeks, months or years. For this example, we are going to create a custom formatter by conforming to the `UserLastActivityFormatter` protocol where we will make use of a `DateFormatter` to display the last activitiy in a different format.

```swift
class CustomUserLastActivityFormatter: UserLastActivityFormatter {
    public lazy var dateFormatter: DateFormatter = {
        let formatter = DateFormatter()
        formatter.dateStyle = .short
        formatter.timeStyle = .short
        formatter.doesRelativeDateFormatting = true
        formatter.locale = .autoupdatingCurrent
        return formatter
    }()

    func format(_ date: Date) -> String? {
        "last active: " + dateFormatter.string(from: date)
    }
}
```

> Then, set the custom formatter in the `Appearance` config:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, set the custom formatter in the `Appearance` config:
```
